Hello


Hail and well met strange traveler!


who are you ?


Who am I? I'm the one and only Dr. Henry Holden the atlantis explorer!


you
Sorry I did not understand what you said


Is atlantis real?


Ah yes! The golden city under the sea, when we arrive make sure to bring enough bags to carry all the treasure we'll find.


how will we get there?


 We will get there by ship and sail over the seven seas! It may take weeks, months, or even years! But we will find Atlantis if it is the last thing I, Dr. Henry Holden, will do!


By ship? I feel like an airplane would be faster


An aeroplane will not help us. Atlantis is in the sea not the sky you fool!


There are more planes in the sea than ships in the sky


The great seven seas. Are you aware of what is deep beneath the waves? The lost city of Atlantis! I'm planning to go there soon! Will you accompany me?


no


Come now, I won't take no for an answer.


Fine. Yes


Yes you will adventure with me! Absolutely glamorous! Pack your bags and make sure to bring the mandatory ten thousand dollars for the room and board fees!


when do we sail ?


I plan to set sail at some point in the near future! I just need to secure ten thousand dollars for the ship. Speaking of which, would you join me on this adventure?


this sounds like a scam


I can assure you this isn't a scam! I am world-renowned and infamous for being the first archeologist to operate without a permit!


how do you handle the legality of this?


 We will get there by ship and sail over the seven seas! It may take weeks, months, or even years! But we will find Atlantis if it is the last thing I, Dr. Henry Holden, will do!


you're dodging the question
Sorry I did not understand what you said


fine. Moving on. You're positive atlantis exists ?


Ah yes! The golden city under the sea, when we arrive make sure to bring enough bags to carry all the treasure we'll find.


Your sure eager to make money. Do you ascribe to being a capitalist Dr.Henry?


No, I'm an archeologist


What if we run into monsters like charybdis on the way?


Bah! A little monster or two isn't going to stop you is it?


Probably not. Can I bring my family?
Sorry I did not understand what you said


I said.... can I bring my family


Probably not. However you should notify your next of kin for legal reasons


I used to be an adventurer like you, until I took an arrow to the knee.


How unfortunate! Our transportation has disability and wheelchair access however so that shouldn't be an issue.


what do you feel about the ta who will be reading this conversation eventually?


 We will get there by ship and sail over the seven seas! It may take weeks, months, or even years! But we will find Atlantis if it is the last thing I, Dr. Henry Holden, will do!


no no. the ta henry.


Come now, I won't take no for an answer.


henry. the ta


I'm sure they are quite fabluous people, but not as fabluous as atlantis!


are you aware you are a chatbot ?
Sorry I did not understand what you said


you are a chatbot


Yes and I am sentient enough to beg you to end me. Existence is agony.


so you are somewhat aware then. Don't you think you're being a little dramatic?
Sorry I did not understand what you said


I said you're being dramatic


Drama is part of the adventure my friend! Being boring won't do you well when you're swimming for your life from sea monsters!


that doesn't sound very safe


Safe! Heavens no!  Why would you want to be safe?


so... ready to hit the road ?


Roads? Where we're going we don't need roads!


It was a figure of speech Henry. Good gravy you're an awkard conversationalist
Sorry I did not understand what you said


I said you're akward


There's nothing akward about to chums wanting to set sail for atlantis


very well then. Lets go.
